---
layout: post
title:  "Topic Modeling"
date:   2012-12-15 12:00:0
categories: Shallow learning
---

I've played quite a bit with the 2012 Reuters news articles that you
pointed me towards before Xmas.  After removing duplicates from the raw
text files, I found ~43K distinct documents.  I converted each article into
HTML and pulled out its headline for thumbnail generation purposes.  This
data set clearly exhibits much more diversity than the 1K astrophysics
articles I had worked with earlier in December.

Following your suggestion, I used Latent Semantic Analysis to reduce the
the initial set of ~28K corpus words down to 300 linear combinations.
TF-IDF on the dimensionally-reduced data then yielded a network among the
Reuters articles.  I imposed a fairly strict edge-weight threshold on the
graph and ended up with 273 connected components which had at least 10
documents.

I next googled around and stumbled upon several articles by Princeton
professor David Blei on topic modeling in general and Latent Dirichlet
Allocation in particular.  Blei has publically available C code which
imports sparse document-word matrices and generates topic distributions
over the word vocabulary.  I ran Blei's codes on each of the 273 connected
components' documents.  I was really amazed at how well the first few
dominant LDA-generated topics seem to summarize tens, hundreds and even
thousands of articles within each connected component.

I was very curious to see if the connected components could be clustered
according to basic themes.  After lots of trial and error, I finally
settled upon synthesizing "documents" from the topic keywords for each
connected component.  I then re-ran the entire pipeline described above on
the new set of 273 "topic documents".  Once the machine found a reasonable
set of clusters for the connected components, I asked it to arrange them in
a 2D layout rather than in a horizontal row which I've used for every Image
Search System example to date.

Screen shots 1a and 1b illustrate the 2D layout of all the Reuters
articles.  (Since I only kept connected components with at least 10
articles, only ~28K of the original ~43K articles appear in the graph
viewer.)  Each row of connected components corresponds to a set of
connected components which share some gross theme(s).

![alt text]({{ site.url }}/blog/images/topic_modeling/reuters_1a.png)

![alt text]({{ site.url }}/blog/images/topic_modeling/reuters_1b.png)


Screen shots 2a and 2b show the topics for individual connected components.
The dominant 4 words in the top 5 topics are displayed above each connected
component.  Blei's codes return all possible mappings between words,
documents and topics.  So it'd be neat if in the future a user could select
a particular topic and see its corresponding documents light up.  (Delsey
has also suggested displaying topics as a word-cloud.  This would eliminate
lots of repetition among topic keywords.)  Thematic relationships between
connected components in the same row are fairly evident.


![alt text]({{ site.url }}/blog/images/topic_modeling/reuters_2a.png)

![alt text]({{ site.url }}/blog/images/topic_modeling/reuters_2b.png)

Screen shots 3a and 3b zoom into one particular connected component which
is obviously about Syria.  The headlines for the 452 Reuters articles
within this particular component seem to all logically relate to one
another.


![alt text]({{ site.url }}/blog/images/topic_modeling/reuters_3a.png)

![alt text]({{ site.url }}/blog/images/topic_modeling/reuters_3b.png)

Screen shots 4a and 4b zoom into another connected component about the
European economic situation.

There are obvious image analogs to nearly every step in this document
processing pipeline.  So I hope we'll get a chance to do something similar
for a large, varied corpus of digital pictures in the future.


![alt text]({{ site.url }}/blog/images/topic_modeling/reuters_4a.png)

![alt text]({{ site.url }}/blog/images/topic_modeling/reuters_4b.png)

## References


1. D. Blei, "Latent Dirichlet Allocation in C",
http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~blei/lda-c/

2.  P. Cho and M. Yee, "Image Search System", 41st AIPR workshop, 2012.


